JOHN YANG: Good evening.
I'm John Yang.
Judy Woodruff is away.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
JEFF SESSIONS, U.S. Attorney
General: This
executive order, just as the
first executive
order, is a lawful and proper
exercise of
presidential authority.
JOHN YANG: The Trump
administration unveils
a revised travel ban after the
first was blocked
by the courts.
Then: Making Sense of President
Trump's wiretapping
claim.
What's behind the charge that
President Obama
was listening in on Trump Tower?
And Jeffrey Brown sits down with
"Get Out"
director Jordan Peele to talk
why the hit
horror film about race that is
striking a
chord with audiences.
JORDAN PEELE, Director, "Get
Out": For me
the social thriller is the
thriller in which
the fears, the horrors, and the
thrills are
coming from society.
They're coming from the way
humans interact.
JOHN YANG: All that and more on
tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JOHN YANG: Moments ago, House
Republicans
released their bill to meet a
key Trump campaign
promise, to repeal and replace
the Affordable
Care Act, often called
Obamacare.
Some of the key changes include
ending direct
government subsidies for low-
and middle-income
Americans to buy coverage.
Instead, there will be
refundable tax credits
to do that.
Ending penalties of the
individual mandate,
and a phase-out of the expansion
of Medicaid
in 2020, but coverage would
continue for a
while for those already covered.
Lisa Desjardins just attended a
briefing in
the House Ways and Means
Committee.
She joins me now from Capitol
Hill.
Lisa, some of these proposals
are not popular
among conservative Republicans,
are they?
LISA DESJARDINS: That's right,
in particular
the tax credits.
Some Republicans say that's just
another way
to giving subsidies to Americans
for their
health care.
But the tax credits are a very
key component
here.
The way they would work, John,
is any individual
who makes $75,000 or less would
get some amount
of money to help them buy health
care, but
as a tax credit.
It would depend on how old you.
The largest tax credit would go
to those Americans
over 60.
They would get $4,000 to help to
go to the
health care.
Of course, on the other side,
Democrats say
this doesn't do enough to help
those populations
that can't afford health care
get where they
need to be.
JOHN YANG: And the governors,
even some Republican
governors, who have used the
Obamacare to
expand Medicaid, are they going
to be happy
with the phase-out of that
money?
LISA DESJARDINS: For a couple of
years, they
will be happy.
And then they will have some
problems in their
states potentially, depending on
how this
works.
If you were on the Medicaid
expansion, those
are basically what they call
able-bodied workers,
people who are under the poverty
threshold,
about 138 percent of poverty,
people who really
can't afford health care
essentially, but
don't fall into other categories
of Medicaid.
Right now, you are able to
receive health
care through the Affordable Care
Act.
But you will be able to receive
that for the
rest of your life if you are
enrolled now.
You will be grandfathered into
this system.
However, after 2020, there will
be no people
in that category allowed to
join.
So, we're talking basically
working-age adults
who do not earn much money.
You can enroll now up until
2020.
You will not be able to enroll
in Medicaid
after that.
JOHN YANG: All this, of course,
is if it passes
and if it passes in the current
form.
Sean Spicer at the White House
said the target
date for signing this bill would
be the Easter
recess.
How likely is that?
How realistic is that, Lisa?
LISA DESJARDINS: Well, we can
just look back
at the Affordable Care Act
itself.
It similarly had an early
summer, I believe,
goal date of being passed.
When was it actually signed into
law?
The next year, 2020 (sic).
So, that's an incredibly
ambitious goal, John.
The next couple of days will
tell us a lot
about whether that is even
doable.
We expect committees to start
poring over
the details.
And, as you said, John, there
are disagreements
not just from Democrats, but
from Republicans
about the details of this plan.
JOHN YANG: Lisa Desjardins, who
is going to
be busy following all those
details as they
make their way through Capitol
Hill, Lisa,
thanks a lot.
In the day's other lead story:
The government
is girding tonight for a new
legal battle
on its second try at a travel
ban.
The new order, issued today,
again targets
a group of mostly Muslim
nations.
But it makes critical changes in
a bid to
try to avoid the issues that led
courts to
block it.
Jeffrey Brown begins our
coverage.
JEFFREY BROWN: President Trump
signed the
original ban at the Pentagon
after just a
week in office.
Today's signing was done in
private, with
only a single still photo
released.
It fell to Cabinet members to
make the announcement,
starting with Secretary of State
Rex Tillerson.
REX TILLERSON, U.S. Secretary of
State: President
Trump is exercising his rightful
authority
to keep our people safe.
As threats to our security
continue to evolve
and change, common sense
dictates that we
continually reevaluate and
reassess the systems
we rely upon to protect our
country.
JEFFREY BROWN: Unlike the
original order,
this new one removes Iraq from
the original
list of seven nations whose
citizens are barred
from entering the U.S., keeps
out Syrian refugees
for 120 days, instead of
indefinitely, and
drops any explicit exception for
Christian
and other religious minorities
in Muslim nations.
In addition, it's made explicit
this time
that valid visa holders and
foreign nationals
with green cards securing their
residence
in the U.S. are not included in
the ban.
The first order was effectively
halted by
federal courts within days of
being issued.
White House Press Secretary Sean
Spicer said
today in an audio-only session
that it's now
being revoked.
SEAN SPICER, White House Press
Secretary:
We continue to maintain that the
order was
fully lawful, but there were
some legal hurdles
that we'd have to potentially
cross in terms
of enjoinment and things like
that.
So, it was discussed with the
president Saturday,
and he made a decision that this
is how he
wanted to proceed.
JEFFREY BROWN: Among other
things, federal
judges said the original order
cited no evidence
of an actual threat.
The new directive says the FBI
is pursuing
300 terrorism-related
investigations of individuals
admitted as refugees.
Officials also hope to avoid the
chaos at
airports when the original order
took effect,
as people in transit were
detained, delayed
and expelled without notice.
Homeland Security Secretary John
Kelly:
JOHN KELLY, U.S. Homeland
Security Secretary:
We are going to work closely to
implement
and enforce it humanely,
respectfully, and
with professionalism, but we
will enforce
the law.
So, there should be no
surprises, whether
it's in the media or on Capitol
Hill.
JEFFREY BROWN: But opponents
showed no sign
of backing down.
Washington State Attorney
General Bob Ferguson,
who successfully challenged the
first order,
spoke this afternoon in Seattle.
BOB FERGUSON, Washington State
Attorney General:
The chaos it inflicted around
our country,
you all saw it.
It wasn't right.
I certainly hope they take way
numerous lessons
from this experience, but, if
they don't,
they can expect us to see us
challenging future
executive orders as well.
JEFFREY BROWN: For now, pending
court action,
the new order is set to take
effect March
16.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Jeffrey Brown.
JOHN YANG: In the day's other
news: The U.S.
Supreme Court said it won't hear
a case on
transgender bathroom use in
public schools
after all.
A lower court had ruled in favor
of a Virginia
teenager who wanted access to
the boys' bathroom.
Since then, the Trump
administration rolled
back federal guidelines
supporting that stance.
Today's action sends the case
back to the
lower court for further review.
In a separate case, the high
court ruled that
ferreting out racial bias can
override the
sanctity of jury deliberations.
The justices ruled 5-3 for a man
convicted
on sex charges in Colorado.
He argued that a juror's
anti-Mexican comments
tainted his trial.
He can now seek a new trial.
North Korea successfully
test-launched four
more missiles this morning,
raising new alarm.
They were fired from northwest
of Pyongyang
and flew an average of 620
miles.
Three of them landed in Japanese
waters.
Japan condemned the launches, as
did the South
Korean Foreign Ministry.
CHO JUNE-HYUCK, South Korean
Foreign Ministry
Spokesman (through translator):
This provocation
clearly reveals the North Korean
regime's
reckless willingness to continue
its nuclear
and missile developments,
despite unified
warnings from the international
community.
North Korea should realize that
its frenzied
obsession with only result in
self-isolation
and self-destruction.
JOHN YANG: The North Korean
missile tests
coincided with a joint
U.S.-South Korean military
drill.
In Yemen, the U.S. kept up a new
air campaign
against al-Qaida militants over
the weekend.
Witnesses say suspected U.S.
drones attacked
in two provinces, going after a
training camp
and other targets.
Separately, the Pentagon
confirmed that a
U.S. airstrike last week in
Yemen killed a
former Guantanamo Bay detainee.
A retired policeman in the
Philippines testified
today that President Rodrigo
Duterte was linked
to nearly 200 killings when he
was a mayor.
The victims allegedly included
political opponents,
and were carried out by a death
squad.
The retired officer appeared as
part of a
Senate investigation into
extrajudicial killings
in Davao City, where Duterte was
mayor for
22 years.
ARTURO LASCANAS, Retired Police
Officer (through
translator): I can't make myself
take to my
grave these dark and evil
secrets from my
life born out of my obedience to
Mayor Rodrigo
Duterte's orders and to his
campaign against
criminality and illegal drugs.
I had blind obedience and
loyalty to the point
that I was indirectly involved
in killing
my two brothers.
JOHN YANG: Duterte brought his
anti-drug campaign
to the presidency eight months
ago.
Since then, more than 8,000
people have been
killed nationwide.
Back in this country, two the
secretary of
homeland security, John Kelly,
told CNN he'd
consider separating women and
children who
cross the Mexican border
illegally in order
to deter those crossings.
And in a speech, Housing
Secretary Ben Carson
caused a stir.
He praised immigrants' work
ethic and said
there were other immigrants who
came here
in the bottom of slave ships.
A spokesman said Carson didn't
mean to equate
immigration and slavery.
The Pentagon says it's
investigating reports
of U.S. Marines sharing nude
photographs of
female Marines, veterans and
others.
Some of the images were taken
without the
women's knowledge.
They appeared on a private
Facebook page called
Marines United.
It had some 30,000 members.
And on Wall Street, stocks were
broadly lower,
due in part to China trimming
its economic
growth outlook.
The Dow Jones industrial average
lost 51 points
to close at 20954.
The Nasdaq fell 21 points, and
the S&P 500
slipped nearly eight.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
is the revised
travel ban constitutional?;
behind President
Trump's accusation that
President Obama wiretapped
Trump Tower; and much more.
Trump's accusation that
President Obama wiretapped
Trump Tower; and much more.
As we heard, today's revised
travel ban was
drafted by the Trump
administration to stand
up in court after the first one
was rejected
by federal courts.
But critics still question its
constitutional,
amid a broader debate over
whether it will
really make the country safer.
Here again, Jeffrey Brown.
JEFFREY BROWN: And for that, we
are joined
by Neal Katyal, a former acting
solicitor
general under President Obama.
He also served as a national
security adviser
for the Justice Department in
the Clinton
administration.
And Kansas Secretary of State
Kris Kobach,
he was a top adviser to
President Trump during
his 2016 campaign and through
the transition.
Welcome to both of you.
Let me start with you, Kris
Kobach.
The first attempt failed in the
courts.
What do you see as the key
change that might
allow this one to pass?
Mr. Kobach, can you hear me?
KRIS KOBACH (R), Kansas
Secretary of State:
Now I can hear you, yes.
Go ahead.
JEFFREY BROWN: OK.
All right.
Sorry about the technical
problem.
My question was that the first
order didn't
pass muster.
What's the key change here that
you think
allows this one?
KRIS KOBACH: Well, if you look
at the two
of them side by side, this one
is very different
in the way it's packaged and put
together.
It reads like a legal brief,
rather than like
a traditional executive order.
It's filled with case -- with
citations to
statutes.
It is filled with factual
assertions that
the Ninth Circuit said it was
lacking.
And so it also goes very
specifically point
by point through the things that
the Ninth
Circuit hypothesized could cause
a due process
issue.
So it really -- it's tailor-made
to the Ninth
Circuit's decision.
And I think this order, if it
were challenged
in the Ninth Circuit, it would
be the most
activist judicial venue for it,
I think it
will survive.
And, of course, if it survives
the Ninth Circuit,
it will survive anywhere else
too.
JEFFREY BROWN: Neal Katyal, will
it survive?
What do you see?
NEAL KATYAL, Former Acting U.S.
Solicitor
General: It won't survive.
I think Kris is just about as
right this time
as he was last time, on January
30, when he
said -- quote -- "Trump has
rock-solid legal
authority.
These cases are losers."
He was wrong then.
He is wrong now.
He is right that this reads like
a legal brief,
but it reads like a bad legal
brief.
It ignores what Congress has
said in 1965
in its landmark act, which is,
you can't discriminate
on the basis of nationality.
And to attack the Ninth Circuit
as being activist,
as he said, is, I think, really
the wrong
way to go.
It echoes what President Trump
said about
so-called judges and so on.
Every time they lose a case,
they disagree.
But these are rock-solid
American values that
the challengers are standing up
for.
JEFFREY BROWN: One of the
challenges had been
on constitutional grounds.
In this case, is it still a
Muslim ban, the
way it was before, given the
change in language?
NEAL KATYAL: It is.
There are some changes.
In this new executive order, it
does say:
We don't intend to discriminate
against Muslim.
But the Supreme Court has been
very clear
that just because a government
says that -- they
can always say, we don't intend
to discriminate
on the basis of religion.
You have to go back to look at
the history
of this.
And if it's a pretext for
discrimination,
as this sure looks like, then it
is going
to fall in the courts for that
reason.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, what about
that, Mr.
Kobach, the Muslim issue
specifically, and
then also that this new law,
this new order
still distinguishes by
nationality?
KRIS KOBACH: Well, if you look
at the text
of the order, it's quite clear
that it has
nothing to do with religion.
Indeed, it says that special
protection in
our refugee program is afforded
to those who
are members of minority
religions, including
in cases where the minority
religion is the
Muslim religion.
If you look at the selection of
the six countries,
you have got dozens of other
countries around
the world that are majority
Muslim countries
that are not selected for
special treatment.
And, furthermore, this new order
calls for
a review of all of the countries
on the planet
to see if they too should be
added to the
special list.
So, to characterize this as a
Muslim ban is
just simply false.
It is based on facts about these
six countries
that make them hotbeds of
terrorism.
And those facts are listed in
the order.
As for Neal's point about
somehow this being
against what Congress has said,
I would direct
him to the United States Code
Title 8, Section
1182-F, which says the president
may, if he
finds the entry of certain
aliens detrimental
to the interests of the United
States, he
may suspend or bar the entry of
those aliens.
That's exactly what the
president did.
The statutory grounds for this
are very strong.
That's why the challenge had to
be based on
a due process constitutional
ground.
And so that's what we really
should be debating.
Can they make a constitutional
challenge on
this one?
JEFFREY BROWN: Let me ask you,
Neal Katyal.
That, in part, goes to this
attempt time around
to fill in the security
justifications, right?
NEAL KATYAL: So, two things.
First of all, Kris isn't reading
to the whole
statute.
First of all, there's a later
statute passed
in 1965, 13 years after the one
he read, and
this says -- quote -- "No person
shall receive
any preference or priority or be
discriminated
against in the issuance of an
immigrant visa
because of that person's
nationality."
That's later.
And the other part of that law
that he read,
Section 1182, Congress later
implemented -- later
said that, in order to ban
someone on the
basis of terrorism, you have to
have reasonable
grounds on an individualized
basis.
That's not what the president
did.
JEFFREY BROWN: Let me ask you
briefly, though,
how much -- doesn't it come down
to how much
deference the executive is
granted when it
comes to national security and
immigration?
NEAL KATYAL: Sure.
And I used to stand up and
defend the United
States on national security
grounds all the
time.
This one is a very hard one to
defend, because
there isn't the evidence that
you need this
now.
Indeed, the evidence Kris is
referring to
that was in the executive order
is from 1979
and 1984.
So, the idea that you need this
magically
now is, I think, a very hard
argument for
courts to accept, particularly
given the history
of this particular ban.
This has been a Muslim ban from
the start.
JEFFREY BROWN: Kris Kobach,
what's your response?
KRIS KOBACH: Well, the
description in the
executive order is not from 1979
or 1983.
It talks about conditions on the
ground in
those six countries right now.
I would also add that, since
9/11, we have
had 53 terrorist from those six
countries
either arrested or convicted of
terrorism-related
crimes who have entered using
those visas
from those countries since then.
So, this is a very present
threat right now.
And so, again, the statutory
grounds are very
strong.
I think Neal has to admit that.
But the debate about is, is
there a due process
violation?
And the Ninth Circuit kind of
had to bend
over backwards and imagine
hypothetical cases
where somebody might be denied
their day in
court.
But this order says, look, you
are going to
get your day.
If you're in the United States
illegally,
you are still going to be able
to make your
claims in front an immigration
judge.
And so I think it's just going
to be a much
harder lift for the attorneys
trying to challenge
this.
Will they challenge it?
I'm sure they will.
JEFFREY BROWN: OK.
We're out of time.
But, Neal, harder to challenge,
but the challenges
will come, in a word, right?
NEAL KATYAL: And they're not
hard.
As President Trump says, see you
in court.
JEFFREY BROWN: OK.
Neal Katyal, Kris Kobach, thank
you both very
much.
NEAL KATYAL: Thank you.
JOHN YANG: Now to President
Trump's shocking
series of tweets on Saturday and
what's behind
the unsupported allegations.
On today's morning shows,
administration officials
Kellyanne Conway and Sarah
Huckabee Sanders
pressed President Trump's case.
SARAH HUCKABEE SANDERS, Senior
Trump Adviser:
Look, the president firmly
believes that the
Obama administration may have
tapped into
the phones at Trump Tower.
KELLYANNE CONWAY, Senior Trump
Adviser: Let's
get to the bottom of it.
That is the president's entire
point.
JOHN YANG: Like the president,
they offered
no evidence, but Conway said Mr.
Trump may
have information and
intelligence the rest
of us do not.
In the Senate today, Democratic
Leader Chuck
Schumer said the claim added to
the need for
an independent probe of alleged
ties between
Russia and the Trump campaign.
SEN.
CHUCK SCHUMER (D-NY), Minority
Leader: The
events of this weekend, which
included another
troubling, baseless tweet from
the president,
highlight and in fact strengthen
the argument
for a special prosecutor to
conduct the investigation.
JOHN YANG: The president sparked
the firestorm
with a weekend tweet: "Just
found out that
Obama had my wires tapped in
Trump Tower just
before the victory."
A spokesman for former President
Obama swiftly
denied it, as did his former
director of national
intelligence, James Clapper.
JAMES CLAPPER, Former National
Intelligence
Director: There was no such
wiretap activity
mounted against the president,
the president-elect
at the time or, as a candidate
or against
his campaign.
JOHN YANG: Mr. Trump asked
Congress to investigate,
and Press Secretary Sean Spicer
said there
would be no further comment.
Today, Spicer briefed reporters
off-camera.
SEAN SPICER, White House Press
Secretary:
There's no question that
something happened.
The question is, is it
surveillance, is it
a wiretap or whatever?
But there's been enough
reporting that strongly
suggests that something
occurred.
JOHN YANG: It appears to trace
back to Thursday
evening and conservative radio
host Mark Levin.
MARK LEVIN, Conservative Radio
Host: Barack
Obama and his surrogates, who
were supporting
Hillary Clinton and their party,
the Democrat
Party, who were using the
instrumentalities
of the federal government,
intelligence activities,
to surveil members of the Trump
campaign!
JOHN YANG: That was picked up
Friday morning
by Breitbart News, formerly run
by Trump adviser
Steve Bannon.
President Trump's tweet came
about 24 hours
later.
FBI Director James Comey
reportedly asked
the Justice Department to refute
the claim.
We dig in to the president's
claims now with
Congressman Adam Schiff, the top
Democrat
on the House Intelligence
Committee, and Stewart
Baker, who was assistant
homeland security
secretary for policy under
President George
W. Bush.
He also was general counsel at
the National
Security Agency from 1992 to
1994.
Gentlemen, thank you for being
with us.
Welcome to you both.
Mr. Schiff, my first question is
for you.
What's your response to the
president's request
that the Intelligence Committee
take this
question, whether or not there
was any potentially
politically motivated
investigation, investigative
branch powers were abused,
whether that happened,
into your investigation of ties
between Russia
and the Trump campaign?
And have you spoken to Chairman
Nunes about
this yet?
REP.
ADAM SCHIFF (D), California: I
have not had
a chance to discuss it with the
chairman.
But, look, I think this whole
allegation the
president has made is reckless,
and, given
that it comes without any
substantiation whatsoever,
breathtakingly reckless.
We already know from Director
Clapper that,
under the agencies that he was
overseeing
in the intelligence community,
there was no
FISA warrant directed at Mr.
Trump or his
campaign.
And, yes, we can bring him in
before our committee
and have him repeat in closed
session the
same thing he said privately.
And if the reports are correct
that Director
Comey has said the same thing
and asked the
Department of Justice to push
back on this,
then it's clear there was no
criminal wiretap.
And that is a simple matter to
resolve as
well.
But I think the call for this to
be investigated
is much like the president's
call to investigate
his claim that millions of
undocumented immigrants
voted.
It's patently absurd and it's
designed, I
think, to give some patina of
respectability
to a claim that really has none
at all.
JOHN YANG: Mr. Baker,
breathtakingly reckless,
patently absurd?
What do you say?
STEWART BAKER, Former General
Counsel, National
Security Agency: No, I don't
understand that.
We know from multiple reports,
including The
New York Times, that there were
intercepts
and there were FISA orders in
connection with
Russian efforts to influence the
campaign.
And we know from Mike Flynn's
resignation
that those intercepts covered
conversations
that members of the campaign
had.
And I think it's perfectly
reasonable to say,
let's investigate that.
What we have heard from former
Obama administration
officials are very limited
non-denial denials.
That is to say, the president
says, I didn't
order anything.
Well, of course, he doesn't.
But the Justice Department and
the FISA court
could have.
We have Jim Clapper saying, we
didn't target
the campaign or Mr. Trump.
There's a lot of other people
that could have
been targeted that would look
pretty political
if it was done in bad faith.
I think it's fair to ask the
question, what
are the facts?
And that's what your committee
is for.
JOHN YANG: Mr. Schiff, you say
that there
was no surveillance whatsoever
that might
have captured some
communications between
people close to Mr. Trump?
REP.
ADAM SCHIFF: No, that's not what
I have said.
And I think what Mr. Baker has
addressed is
really not what the president
tweeted, which
was that the president had
wiretapped his
campaign.
It's entirely possible -- and I
can't comment
on what we have been hearing in
the committee
-- that, as part of our foreign
intelligence
gathering directed at foreign
spies, that
we may have intercepted
communications between
Russian or between Russians and
Americans.
But, frankly, if that's the
case, then the
president has a big problem,
because why would
Trump campaign people be talking
to the Russians,
if that was the context in which
communications
were gathered?
So I'm not saying that's the
case, but if
what Mr. Baker is referring to
is our efforts
to target Russian targets,
that's something
very different than what the
president alleged.
And I think for a president of
the United
States to make this kind of an
allegation
about his predecessor, I think,
in the eyes
of the rest of the world and our
own citizens,
really brings discredit on
himself and on
our very democracy.
JOHN YANG: Mr. Baker, is there
anything nefarious
about that, if they were
targeting Russians
and they captured communications
with people
close to Trump in that process?
STEWART BAKER: In my view, we
had to do that.
If the Russians are messing with
our elections,
we cannot tolerate that.
We need to know and we need to
take action
against it.
At the same time, opening this
investigation
of one campaign, and in the
middle of an election,
has enormous political
consequences.
And it's fair to ask the
question, were those
political consequences part of
the determination
to pursue this?
And that is something that ought
to be looked
at, along with the Russian
attempt to influence
the election.
JOHN YANG: Mr. Schiff, is that a
legitimate
question for the committee to be
looking into?
REP.
ADAM SCHIFF: Well, I think, if
you look at
the facts here, actually, much
of the criticism,
frankly, that I have leveled and
others is
that the Obama administration
did too little
during the course of the Russian
interference
in our election, not too much,
that the Obama
administration, in fact, was so
wary about
being perceived as trying to put
its hand
on the scales or interfere in
the election,
that they were reluctant to even
call out
Russia on what was so plain to
the intelligence
agencies.
Indeed, Senator Feinstein and I
had to take
the step of doing that ourselves
before the
intelligence community was ready
or willing
to do that.
So, I think, quite the contrary,
if the Obama
administration erred here -- and
I think they
did -- it was in not calling
this out earlier,
not seeking sanctions along with
our allies
earlier.
STEWART BAKER: I think you can
believe that
the president, President Obama,
wasn't sufficiently
tough with the Russians and
still believe
that he was determined to be
aggressive with
the Trump campaign.
He does take domestic politics
very personally.
And, you know, the FISA system
is set up to
provide protection for our civil
liberties
by ensuring that the decision to
use FISA
is at the highest levels of
government, which
it turns out, of course, are all
political
appointees.
And in the context of an
election investigation,
that's just not comforting.
I don't think that the president
is going
to be satisfied to hear, oh, no,
President
Obama didn't wiretap you, Sally
Yates did.
JOHN YANG: I'm afraid we're
going to have
to leave it there.
Stewart Baker, Representative
Adam Schiff,
thank you very much for joining
us.
I'm sure we will be returning to
this topic
again.
STEWART BAKER: It was a
pleasure.
JOHN YANG: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": we
talk to Jordan
Peele, the director of a horror
film about
race; and students compete to
have their science
experiments sent to space.
But, first, let's unpack the
politics behind
President Trump's new travel
ban, the allegations
of wiretapping and the White
House's agenda
for the week.
It's time for Politics Monday
with Amy Walter
of The Cook Political Report and
Tamara Keith
of NPR.
Tam, you were one of the radio
poolers this
weekend.
You went with Trump down to
Mar-a-Lago in
Florida.
So, nice quiet weekend?
(LAUGHTER)
TAMARA KEITH, National Public
Radio: Yes,
I think we were expecting it to
be a quiet
weekend.
There weren't a lot of aides
that came down
with him on Air Force One.
But by the end of the weekend,
there were
a lot of people at Mar-a-Lago
meeting with
President Trump all of a sudden.
Those tweets came out of the
darkness of morning
and changed the weekend for
sure.
JOHN YANG: What do you make of
it?
Where did it come from, do you
think?
TAMARA KEITH: Well, it is
unclear.
If you ask the White House, they
won't say
where it came from.
If you put some dots together,
it looks like
it came from a Breitbart story
that rounded
up that Mark Levin talk show and
various other
news reports that are out there.
And the White House keeps
pointing to reports.
I started asking at 7:00 a.m.
Saturday.
And the questions continue,
where exactly
is the president getting this
from?
He's the president of the United
States.
It's possible he could be
getting intelligence
from somewhere.
But instead we're hearing about
reports.
And his spokespeople are saying,
well, if
it's true, it would be a huge
scandal.
That's mighty conditional.
JOHN YANG: And, Amy, from the
outside, it
looked like another -- we're
seeing the reports
that the president was angry
when he did this.
From the outside, it seemed like
he had a
pretty good week.
He had the speech on Tuesday
that got great
reviews.
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political
Report: Absolutely.
JOHN YANG: Friday, when Attorney
General Sessions
recused himself, it seems to me,
from the
outside looking in, that that
put the issue
to rest.
That was a good thing for them.
AMY WALTER: But he didn't see it
as a good
thing.
JOHN YANG: Exactly.
AMY WALTER: This is a White
House and certainly
a president who believes that,
if you back
down on anything, you have lost.
And so the decision by Sessions
to recuse
himself was seen not as a
victory, but as
-- really as a big defeat.
And, you know, this is a funny
thing, too,
about this administration, and
really the
president.
It's like we live in these
bifurcated worlds.
Right?
He gets angry, and it goes into
a tweet.
He defended Sessions on Twitter,
but then
sort of accepts, though
grudgingly, what the
effect is.
He was upset that Michael Flynn
had to resign,
but he accepted that.
He's upset about Sessions, but
he accepted
it.
But he takes it out on Twitter.
Meanwhile, it's the rest of the
world that's
trying to keep up with what this
all means.
And, as we have seen from the
panel that was
right in front of us, it's not
really changing
anything on Capitol Hill.
There is no special prosecutor.
This is still all within
Congress.
They're either going to find
something or
they're not.
Nothing that happened this
weekend is going
to change that.
And we're still just really
wrapping around
the axle on an issue that we
don't have any
clarity.
TAMARA KEITH: Though it does
give Democrats
a little more ammunition to ask
for an independent
investigator, a special
prosecutor or whatever
it ends up being that they would
want to ask
for.
You know, if it had stopped with
Jeff Sessions
recusing himself, it would have
been harder
for Democrats to make the case
for an independent
investigation.
But add this last weekend to it,
and they
feel like they have a much
better case to
make, that they're going to keep
making.
AMY WALTER: And the polls are on
their side,
too, more Americans saying they
would like
to see that, a special
prosecutor.
JOHN YANG: Yes.
And last week, after that speech
on Tuesday,
the White House felt they had
the momentum,
that they were going to carry
this through,
push their legislative agenda.
We got a big piece of it today,
the House
Republicans unveiling their
proposal for the
repeal and replacement of the
Affordable Care
Act.
Sean Spicer says they want to
sign this into
law by Easter.
AMY WALTER: Right.
That is the goal.
And, listen, This is the most
important thing
to remember.
And I have been saying this from
the very
beginning.
Watch the actions, not just the
words.
The tweets are important, but
the actions
are much more important.
This is a big deal.
This is what every single member
of Congress
ran on, was repealing Obamacare.
The president talked about
repealing Obamacare.
Here is their chance to do it.
A couple things to remember.
First of all, two-thirds of the
folks in the
House, over 50 percent of the
folks the Senate
who are Republicans have never
had a Republican
president during their tenure in
Washington.
They don't know about putting
legislation
together.
They know about opposing.
They don't know about promoting.
This is going to be a big
challenge for them.
Speaker Paul Ryan has had
challenges within
his own party.
We have seen those rebel forces
push up against
him.
Is he going to be able to corral
them?
Mitch McConnell, he's very good
at politics,
but he has a very narrow margin,
only 52 seats
in the Senate, so he cannot lose
very many
of his own.
This is going to be the test to
see if, despite
all that we're seeing with the
tweets, despite
all the chaos we see in the
White House, if
Republicans can get through,
even if not Easter,
let's say early summer, they can
get through
an Obamacare repeal, that is a
big success.
Now, what the repercussions are
going to be
is a whole other story, but,
politically,
that would be a very big deal,
because it
shows that this sort of mishmash
of a coalition
that has been put together
during this Trump
era actually works.
If it doesn't, then we have some
real big
questions, especially what we're
going to
see about taxes, infrastructure
and so forth.
TAMARA KEITH: And you already
have some Republican
senators expressing some
concern, some skepticism
about what House Republicans
might be proposing,
because they have Medicaid
expanded in their
states, and they are concerned
that what is
being proposed on the House side
might negatively
affect their states.
JOHN YANG: And, also, I think,
is this going
to be a test to see how
President Trump is
as...
AMY WALTER: Right, as a
salesperson.
JOHN YANG: Exactly.
Exactly.
AMY WALTER: And at using his
bully pulpit.
He can do two things, one, to
sell it to the
public, but also to get those
recalcitrant
Republicans on board.
He's still very popular among
Republican base.
If he tweets out about
congressman so and
so not getting on board -- but
let's see where
the conservative, especially the
fiscal conservatives,
are on this in the House.
There are still tax --
refundable tax credits,
which means it's still going to
cost money.
And for many members of
Congress, they see
this as an entitlement, which
they want to
fight against.
JOHN YANG: Amy Walter, you have
got the last
word.
Amy Walter, Tamara Keith, thank
you very much.
TAMARA KEITH: You're welcome.
AMY WALTER: You're welcome.
JOHN YANG: Now: the director
behind the breakout
horror flick "Get Out."
The movie has been praised by
critics, and
it's exceeded most box office
expectations.
It has a lot more on its mind
than just scaring
its audience.
Jeff Brown went to Los Angeles
to meet filmmaker
Jordan Peele, who's well known
for his work
on biting racial satire.
JEFFREY BROWN: A trip to meet
the parents
in the heart of safe,
well-heeled, white suburban
America: What could possibly go
wrong?
The new film "Get Out" is a
horror film about
race, and part of the horror is
just how close
to normal it feels.
For first-time director Jordan
Peele, it's
a major hit, and an unlikely
one.
JORDAN PEELE, Director, "Get
Out": I was sure
that, at some point, someone
would come in
and go, guess what?
We can't release the movie.
It's done.
We have gotten word from on
high, this is
too controversial.
We will get in trouble.
JEFFREY BROWN: The 38-year-old
Peele is best
known as part of the sketch
comedy team Key
and Peele, which had a
five-season run on
Comedy Central.
There were racist zombies and
plenty of social
commentary on that show,
addressed with gut-splitting
humor.
In "Get Out," the humor gives
way to horror.
We watch as Chris, played by
Daniel Kaluuya,
begins to realize that all is
not right at
the home of girlfriend Rose,
actress Allison
Williams.
The oh-so-liberal parents are a
little too
friendly.
And there's something very
strange about the
black servants.
Horror, says Peele, has always
been his true
passion.
He modeled his film on classics
like "The
Stepford Wives" that take a big
societal issue
and blow up the discomfort
level, what he
calls a social thriller.
JORDAN PEELE: For me, the social
thriller
is the thriller in which the
fears, the horrors,
and the thrills are coming from
society.
They're coming from the way
humans interact.
JEFFREY BROWN: Why do you think
horror becomes
a good way into that?
JORDAN PEELE: I think that human
beings are
the most awful monster we have
ever seen.
JEFFREY BROWN: Wait a minute.
I mean, that's true.
They're the most beautiful
monster and the
most horrible monster.
JORDAN PEELE: That's right.
I don't think that humans are,
in our nature,
we're evil or anything like
that.
But I do think there's a demon
in our DNA,
in our tribal subconscious that
affects the
way we work and we operate as a
group.
JEFFREY BROWN: After seeing your
film, I was
thinking about the key to the
psychological
horror film, at least for me, is
how close
it is to reality, right?
JORDAN PEELE: I love it because
it feels grounded.
It feels real.
My whole thing is, like, ground
it, ground
it.
If it's comedy, you taken an
absurd comedic
notion and you apply it to
reality.
If it's horror, if it's a
thriller, you do
the same thing.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, you're using
the tropes
and the ticks of white liberals.
The father meets the black
boyfriend and shows
him a picture of Jesse Owens,
right, sort
of, like, oh, are you black, I
didn't even
realize kind of thing.
JORDAN PEELE: That's a lot of my
experience.
And I had never really seen it
portrayed in
film.
That, to me, was a golden
opportunity to put
this kind of uncomfortable
interaction up
and allow us to talk and deal
with it.
JEFFREY BROWN: But what is it?
Is it a hypocrisy?
Is it racism?
What are we talking about?
JORDAN PEELE: I think part of
why the way
we talk about racism is broken
is because
we think of racism as this
unacceptable evil
thing that I couldn't possibly
have within
myself.
I look at racism as one of the
social demons.
And, in its worst, it's violent
and it's a
systemic commitment to
oppression.
At its lightest and most
harmless, it is these
things that are being called
micro-aggressions,
right, which many times it's an
olive branch
that someone's trying to say,
hey, I know
Tiger.
I know Tiger.
JEFFREY BROWN: Which is
something you use
in your film, right?
JORDAN PEELE: I used in my film.
The reality of it is, when those
interactions
add up, it's -- I'm having a
different experience
than that person is having.
Oh, wow, so, yes, I am being
viewed for my
skin as the starting point of
the interaction.
I'm not -- I don't have the
privilege of existing
at this party in the same way
that this white
guy has.
JEFFREY BROWN: You're writing
this years ago,
several years ago, right, in the
middle of
that kind of, are we in a
post-racial America
discussion.
JORDAN PEELE: Yes.
And it was -- the original idea
with the movie
was to point out this very real
horror we
haven't gotten over.
I think what really works about
this movie
is these interactions you're
talking about.
I think black people, minorities
recognize
these interactions and go,
finally, someone
put it up.
I think a lot of white people,
maybe some
recognize it.
Maybe they don't.
JEFFREY BROWN: I was wondering
whether you
saw there being two audiences
for this film,
whether you even thought about
it that way,
the things that the black
audience would react
to that a white audience, they
may not get.
JORDAN PEELE: You know, it's a
really good
question.
I did think of it in terms of
two audiences
often.
JEFFREY BROWN: Even in the
making, you would
think about it?
JORDAN PEELE: In the making,
yes.
I would say -- sometimes, I
would say to Daniel,
who plays Chris, I would be
like, so this
is -- this part, your -- quote,
unquote -- "blackness"
sort of needs to come to the
surface a little
more.
And just give me that thing
where a black
audience member will go like,
thank you.
Thank you.
All right, there he is.
All right, he is.
He's black, he's black, he's
black, you know?
At the same time...
(LAUGHTER)
JEFFREY BROWN: And he knew
exactly what that
meant, of course.
JORDAN PEELE: Then he would go,
yes, yes,
yes.
Got it.
Yes.
At the same time, I very much
didn't want
to make a movie just for black
people.
I wanted to make this an
experience where
everybody's Chris when you're in
the movie.
So, everybody is black.
If you're a white person in the
audience,
you're experiencing a piece of
the black experience
through this character.
JEFFREY BROWN: "Get Out" just
had another
strong weekend, earning $26
million.
That brings the total take to
more than $75
million in its first 10 days,
for a film that
cost just $5 million to make.
From the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Jeffrey Brown.
JOHN YANG: We will be back
shortly with high
school students whose work is
headed to space.
But, first, take a moment to
hear from your
local PBS station.
It's a chance to offer your
support, which
helps keep programs like ours on
the air.
(BREAK)
JOHN YANG: Students from
Rochester, New York's
East High School have been busy
this year
writing a detailed proposal for
a science
experiment that is out of this
world.
As Sasha-Ann Simons from PBS
station WXXI
reports, the project was chosen
to be conducted
on the International Space
Station.
SASHA-ANN SIMONS: When East High
School chemistry
teacher Mary Courtney submitted
three proposals
last fall for the Student
Spaceflight Experiments
Program, she couldn't wait to
find out which
one would take off, literally.
MARY COURTNEY, Teacher, East
High School:
This was a very difficult
project.
It's probably the most difficult
project that
our students do their entire
time in high
school.
SASHA-ANN SIMONS: As part of the
program,
students from 21 schools across
the North
America were competing for the
chance to have
their science experiments that
test how microgravity
affects various organisms sent
to space.
Students De'Aunte Johnson,
Tailor Davis, and
Binti Mohamed were thrilled that
their proposal
was the winning one from East
High.
BINTI MOHAMED, Student: Ms.
Courtney pushed
us aside and she brought the
other two people
that were involved.
And she was like, you guys won.
I was like, are you serious?
Like, I started freaking out.
SASHA-ANN SIMONS: They chose to
conduct their
research on a group of
microscopic organisms
called phytoplankton, which live
in lakes
and oceans.
Through the process of
photosynthesis, the
organism produces half the
oxygen we have
on Earth.
MARY COURTNEY: The question is,
when this
goes to space, is there an
effect by not having
gravity on the production of the
chlorophyll?
And
the other variable that happens
is these -- this
experiment is going to be kept
in a dark container,
and so it's not going to be
exposed to oxygen.
SASHA-ANN SIMONS: Johnson is the
captain of
this student spaceship.
DE'AUNTE JOHNSON, Student: We
had a couple
of different choices, but we
picked mine.
SASHA-ANN SIMONS: So, this was
your idea?
DE'AUNTE JOHNSON: It was my
idea, but I had
the bounce my idea off of them a
couple times
just to make sure when we got it
correct.
SASHA-ANN SIMONS: The final
proposal was a
true team effort, though.
BINTI MOHAMED: There were parts
we all had
to do.
Tailor was doing the
introduction and De'Aunte
was doing part three and four
and stuff like
that.
So, De'Aunte reviewed it later
on and changed
some certain stuff that we
needed to clarify
or get into more detail with.
SASHA-ANN SIMONS: So, why did
they choose
phytoplankton?
MARY COURTNEY: As the United
States and other
countries move forward with
space exploration,
the idea eventually is to be
able to establish
colonies, either on the moon,
other planets.
Right?
And so you have got to be able
when you're
-- if you're on Mars, you have
got to be able
to produce food.
SASHA-ANN SIMONS: That means the
work is far
from over.
The 21 winning experiments will
blast off
in a mini-laboratory to the
International
Space Station in June.
The first order of business for
the East High team will be to
figure out which
The first order of business for
the East High team will be to
figure out which
type of phytoplankton they will
use.
DE'AUNTE JOHNSON: And also which
type of mixture
we're going to use to make sure
they have
DE'AUNTE JOHNSON: And also which
type of mixture
we're going to use to make sure
they have
enough nutrients when they go up
into space.
SASHA-ANN SIMONS: The students
are getting
acquainted with a
spectrophotometer, a machine
that measures the intensity of
light, and
is perhaps what will be their
saving grace.
DE'AUNTE JOHNSON: But are they
moving?
SASHA-ANN SIMONS: And if you
haven't guessed
it already, there's a lot riding
on the student
project.
Once the experiment is aboard
the space station,
astronauts will interact with
it, based on
the guidelines set by these
three.
As the person who has watched it
all come
to life, Courtney says she
couldn't
As the person who has watched it
all come
to life, Courtney says she
couldn't
be more proud.
MARY COURTNEY: I want them to
think completely
differently about everything
around them at
MARY COURTNEY: I want them to
think completely
differently about everything
around them at
the end of the year.
And
if I do that, and they think
really differently
about everyday subjects, then I
have accomplished
my goal.
SASHA-ANN SIMONS: For "PBS
NewsHour," I'm
Sasha-Ann Simons in Rochester,
New York.
JOHN YANG: And that's the
"NewsHour" for tonight.
I'm John Yang.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thanks.
See you soon.